---
title: "The Role of Play Therapy in Emotional Healing"
author: "Dr. Sanjana Purdhani"
date: "25-05-2025"
category: "Play Therapy"
tags: ["#PlayTherapy #Children"]
keywords: ["Play therapy for children", "best mental health clinic in Delhi"]
image: "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gauravshharma/soul-savera/main/images/1748172187988-Picture1.png"
slug: "The-Role-of-Play-Therapy-in-Emotional-Healing"
description: "Various techniques are used by mental health clinics in play therapy to observe and interpret the behavior and mental issues of children. Some of the techniques are"
---

<p>What is the thing a kid loves the most? To let him/her play. The most natural form of expressing emotions in children is by playing. Play allows children to communicate and express in a way that even words would not be able to do justice. <a href="https://soulsavera.com/services" target="_blank" style="color: rgb(17, 85, 204);"><strong>Play therapy for children</strong></a> is one of the best ways in which a child can get therapy and express his/her feelings and emotions. Play therapy also helps children manage their emotions, express way better, and process emotions and it also works as a coping mechanism. This method of therapy is used by professionals to articulate the emotions of children who are suffering from mental health issues like anxiety, depression, grief, abuse or any behavioral changes.</p><p><br></p><p>Soul Savera, the <a href="https://soulsavera.com/" target="_blank" style="color: rgb(17, 85, 204);"><strong>best mental health clinic in Delhi</strong></a>, offers various mental health therapy and one of them is Art and Play Therapy. Soul Savera uses creative methods to deal with issues like anxiety, depression and grief in children by engaging them in art and play therapy.</p><p><br></p><h2><strong>Play Therapy for Children</strong></h2><p>Play therapy deals with children’s natural brain chemistry without them feeling pressurized to talk or do something in which they would feel uncomfortable. It also helps them learn and grow. Whenever we ask a kid to go and play, his/her mind activates, the neurons firing, the rush and the connections build emotionally and strategically. Play therapy provides children with a safe environment in which a child feels free to explore his/her feelings and emotions which helps in problem-solving and resolving internal conflicts. Therapists use toys, clays, sand art, paintings, dolls, and playing sets to observe a child’s behavior and issues.</p><p><br></p><h3>There are two ways in which a therapist acts in play therapy –</h3><p><br></p><p>1<strong>. <u>Directive play therapy</u> – </strong>In this, the therapist actively takes part in the game and understands the child’s issues.</p><p><br></p><p><strong>2. <u>Non-directive play therapy</u> – </strong>In this, the therapist lets the kid play and observes from a distance to understand the specific behavior.</p><p>At Soul Savera, the best mental health clinic, therapists use these kinds of techniques to interpret a child’s mental issues by taking their emotional and mental health into deep consideration.</p><p><br></p><h3><strong>Benefits of Play Therapy for children’s emotional healing</strong></h3><p>For children, play therapy has been considered very good in terms of its results and effectiveness in emotional well-being. Some of the key features are –</p><p><br></p><p><strong>1. <u>Emotionally Expressive</u> –</strong> Playing allows a child to be more expressive since a child will not be very good at verbalizing his/her emotions.</p><p><br></p><p><strong>2. <u>Trauma Acknowledging</u> –</strong> Traumas are something that can be left unacknowledged by anyone whether it’s a kid or a grown-up adult. With the help of play therapy, children can re-enact scenarios which will help them realize and take control of their emotions.</p><p><br></p><p><strong>3. <u>Stress Reduction</u> – </strong>Playing takes the mind off from experiencing anxiety and stress and helps calm down the mind.</p><p><br></p><p><strong>4. <u>Improved Communication</u> –</strong> Play therapy helps in communicating better verbally and non-verbally. It gives a sense of security and relaxation.</p><p><br></p><p><strong>5. <u>Changes in Behaviors</u> – </strong>Playing makes a child care even if it’s for a moment. So, improvements in behavior can be seen as it reduces aggression and irritation, clearing the mind of a child.</p><p><br></p><h2>Techniques Used for Play Therapy</h2><p>Various techniques are used by mental health clinics in play therapy to observe and interpret the behavior and mental issues of children. Some of the techniques are –</p><p><br></p><p>1<strong>. <u>Sand Tray Therapy</u> –</strong> By creating miniature figures and designs on a sand tray, a child reveals his/her subconscious thoughts and emotions.</p><p><br></p><p><strong>2. <u>Art Therapy</u> –</strong> Art therapy includes drawing paintings, doing art, play with colors which allows children to communicate non-verbally.</p><p><br></p><p><strong>3. <u>Puppet-Play</u> –</strong> Dolls and Puppet-play allows children to re-enact and play. This will help the therapist recognize the issues the kid is facing. For example – Physical abuse, violence, etc.</p><p><br></p><p><strong>4. <u>Storytelling</u> –</strong> Every kid loves to hear and tell stories. Storytelling and bibliotherapy help children engage in problem-solving strategies and explore their emotions.</p><p><br></p><p><strong>5. <u>Movement-playing</u> – </strong>Movement-based activities like dance and exercise help reduce stress and take their mind off of the problem.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2>Why Play therapy is beneficial for children?</h2><p>Children are very innocent in every way. While it’s easier for adults to express what they are feeling, it’s kind of difficult for children to express. They often fell short of words while expressing their emotions. Play therapy helps children to feel and express their emotions in verbal and non-verbal forms of communication. Some of the reasons why play therapy works best for children –</p><p><br></p><p><strong>1. <u>Child’ Language </u>–</strong> Playing comes very naturally to a child. For kids, expressing their emotions and words through words is very difficult, especially for younger children. With the help of art, sand tray, storytelling, etc they might feel comfortable to articulate their emotions in a better way.</p><p><br></p><p><strong>2. <u>No pressure</u> –</strong> Due to play therapy’s techniques, a child engages in playing without feeling any pressure to express his/her emotions. Instead of asking a child to express his/her painful memories, a therapist will engage the kid in drawing what he/she felt. So, the child would not feel the pressure to talk or communicate.</p><p><br></p><p><strong>3. <u>Works on emotional healing</u> –</strong> Activities like role-playing, and doing art will help children get comfortable in the environment. They would feel a sense of calm and no pressure to talk about their feelings. Play therapy allows children to explore and process their emotions in a way that would work on their emotional healing.</p><p><br></p><p>Soul Savera, the best mental health clinic in Delhi, helps children understand what they are feeling and gives them the feeling that they can trust the therapist and feel no pressure around them.</p><p><br></p><h2>Why choose Soul Savera for Play Therapy for Children?</h2><p>The brain responds to play therapy organizationally. Playing activates multiple parts of the brain such as problem-solving skills, helping manage emotions, improved behavior and most of all better coping strategies.</p><p><br></p><p>Soul Savera, the best mental health clinic offers play therapy for children by using creative approaches for emotional healing and comprehension. Soul Savera, lets children be children and helps them recover from mental issues by using many techniques. The therapists at Soul Savera make children feel so safe and comfortable by creating a supportive environment in which the child would feel comfortable to be his/her self.</p><p><br></p><h3>Conclusion</h3><p>A child’s mind is very fragile and innocent. It needs extra care and attention as there are many things such as anxiety, depression and some sort of grief that a child faces and is unable to express in a very understandable way. Children mostly communicate through their actions and playing is the most expressive way. Play therapy helps children manage their emotions and helps coping them with issues they did not know existed. Play therapy uses techniques like sand-tray therapy, art therapy, storytelling etc to help articulate the emotions and issues of a child.</p><p>Soul Savera, the best mental health clinic in Delhi offers art and play therapy for children. Here, therapists make children feel comfortable and safe so that they can express themselves in a manner in which they would not feel any sort of pressure. Reach out to us at connect@soulsavera.com and we will make sure that you get the desired help.</p><p><br></p><h2>Frequently asked questions:</h2><p><br></p><p><strong>Q1. How does play therapy help emotionally?</strong></p><p>Ans – Play therapy helps in developing new and creative ways to deal with a problem which helps articulate the emotions of a child.</p><p><br></p><p><strong>Q2. What are the emotional skills of play?</strong></p><p>Ans – Drawing, sketching and storytelling are some of the emotional skills of play therapy.</p><p><br></p><p><strong>Q3. What is the role of play therapy for children?</strong></p><p>Ans – Play therapy helps children understand and express their emotions in a way in which the child feels comfortable. It could be verbal and non-verbal communication. Soul Savera, the best mental health clinic, offers art and play therapy which helps children who are suffering from anxiety and depression in a calm, comfortable and organized way.&nbsp;</p><p>&nbsp;</p>
